Title: Weighted Random
Date: 11/09/2018
Tags: IPT
Unlisted: false
---
The process of randomly selecting weighted options
---

Weighted randoms are an important feature for any data analysis where the system does not want to flood the user with options, but at the same time, they also do not want to always show the same items.  
In the use case of advertising, you want to show the user the ad most appropriate for them, however, you also do not want to always show the same ad all the time; you want to keep things fresh. However you also still should show the user the most relevant item most of the time.  

This is where weighted random systems come into play; they allow you to show the best answer the majority of the time while still occasionally showing other relevant content. Doing this can actually be good for the system because it can allow the eco-system to discover new trends and remove some feedback loops that might develop otherwise in adaptive recommendation systems.  
For instance, if the same ad always shows to the same user, and then click on it multiple times it will reinforce the same choice, thus it will display on other peoples recommendations, and the reinforcement will continue. However, it is never showing that original user or any others another recommendation, so eventually you could end up with a system that always displays the same options to all users due to its own feedback loop; and it also has no chance to discover by chance any other correlations.  
Whereas if a system occasionally shows a recommendation of which does not fit any current trends, but that options now gets clicks under a pattern that previously would have gone undiscovered

## Foundational Knowledge

> Presume that ``rand()`` produces random a number ``0 < x < 1``

The simplest generation of a random value would be the use of;
```javascript
let y = rand();
```
If we instead replace ``rand()`` with ``x`` you can see how this is a simple ``1:1`` relationship. However, if we instead use a more complex geometric relationship like ``y=x^2``, we can see how the average ``y`` value between ``0 < x < 1`` is less than ``0.5``. Thus when we use that relationship to generate a random number it is more likely to get a number below ``0.5`` than above it.
```javascript
let y = rand()**2;
```

### Custom Functions
If you are randomly picking between an apple and a banana there is a 50-50 chance of either being selected; however, if you want the apple to have double the chance of being selected then you would pick from ``[apple, apple, bannana]``.  
While this works as a basic implementation it does not create a range of variety and customisation for how to weight each object, what if you want a 13-87 chance between apple and banana? Are you really going to create a list of 100 items then randomly select an item?  
The whole process can be simplified.

## Custom Weighted Randoms
Using the previous examples we can say;
```math
Apple = 2
Banana = 1
Total = 3
```
So now we can simply stretch our random function to fit over the domain of our options;
```javascript
y = rand() * 3
```
Then simply deduce that if ``y`` is ``< 2`` it must be an apple and otherwise it is a banana.


### Generalisation
We can now expand on this to make a general algorithm.  
Assume that the system is given the weights of each option and the options its self.
```javascript
let weights = [...];
let opts = [...]
```
First, we tally up the total weight
```javascript
let total = 0;
for (let weight of weights){
    total += weight;
}
```
Apply are random function to the domain
```javascript
let y = rand() * total;
```
Now deduce which option the result belongs to.
```javascript
for (index in weights){
    if (y < weights[index]){
        return opt[index];
    }

    y -= weights[index];
}
```
