Title: Appendix: Key VS Value Hashing
Date: 19/2/2018
Tags: IPT
Unlisted: false
---
Squishing your hash functions for smaller ranges with acceptable results
---
Follows on [from](/p/4.html)  

A way of making better hash functions or adapting an existing one is to limit the range of numbers it can produce. This means that if you had a function that previously had no collisions, but would take up a lot of space you can squish it down to take up less space and hopefully not create any collisions.  
A way of doing this simply is to use modulo. First of all, we will add a modulo operator to one of our previous encodings.
```javascript
function encode(str, modulo){
  str = str.toLowerCase();
  let res = chars.indexOf(str[0])+1;

  for (let i=1; i<str.length; i++){
    res = (res * chars.indexOf(str[i])+1) % modulo;
  }

  return res;
}
```

Now we need to try and pick a good modulo value that won't create many collisions, and a good way to decide that is to try and find a best possible solution using sample data.  
Using our previous range as our max value, we will loop through every possible integer modulo and find the number with the least amount of collisions ([code](/code/5.js)).


## Results
<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Modulo</th>
    <td>0</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>9</td><td>10</td><td>11</td><td>20</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Conflicts</th>
    <td>9</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>6</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>1</td>
  </tr>
</table>

We can now see that ``20`` is our best value, which is considerably smaller than our previous range of ``11760000``. However, we still have a collision.

## Hashing Collision handling
A way of dealing with hashing collisions is to store key and value pairs instead of just one or the other. Thus if we try and set a new value with the same hash as an existing one, we can recognise that the keys do not match, and then store the data in the next available slot.  
Thus, also when we try and read by an index as a result of a hash, we can check if the keys match, and if not we can scan each proceeding slot until we find a match.  
Also if we presume that data is never deleted we can terminate the scan if we find an empty slot, because if the data existed it would exist there.